---
title: My First Game
layout: post
post-image: "https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20461089/210939661-3631f7c0-bd69-4e47-9156-5eb9c9bb4ea9.PNG"
description: My very first original game project that I made during high school.
tags:
- arcade shooter
- Video Game
- Programming
---

Defrain is the first original game I conceived from scratch. Before this, I had only been following online tutorials, reading articles/guides, and copying tutorial game projects like the ones on "Unity Learn."

<video src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20461089/210939652-4f437bf8-1673-400d-8b31-27a93f83b086.mp4" controls="controls" autoplay="autoplay" muted="muted" loop="loop"></video>

The first video I am showing here is about the Practice Mode in Defrain. This mode wasn't originally going to be in the game. I added this feature after letting multiple people playtest the game for me and realized there was no tutorial or anything to let people learn how the controls work. I came up with this concept after watching many people who don't usually play games play in front of me. Practice mode has enemies spawn at a much slower rate that then builds up over time. I designed it this way so new players can ease into the gameplay while the rate of speed will continue to go up until it reaches the same speed as normal gameplay in the Arcade and Survival game modes.

<video src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20461089/210939654-768ace70-ff44-4abe-a041-dadb982abb49.mp4" controls="controls" autoplay="autoplay" muted="muted" loop="loop"></video>

The next video above shows off Arcade mode gameplay. This mode keeps track of a score value while the high score is saved across play sessions. This mode is used to enjoy the overall gameplay of the game and unlock cosmetic items to customize the player's ship/bullets. This mode was originally the only goal I had set out to create in the beginning, but as most first projects do, feature creep became a thing, and I  added more features to the design. One of those features is player customization.

<video src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20461089/210939653-ade07a76-2cfa-43e8-9854-c88d9e2ee628.mp4" controls="controls" autoplay="autoplay" muted="muted" loop="loop"></video>

The menu for player customization can be seen in the video above. It's a feature I added based on a suggestion from my friend, so I made that same friend create the art assets he wanted to see in the game. I am no artist at all as you could probably tell from the starting player ship's design (The only art-related asset I created for the game). So to satiate my friend's desire, I deigned a system for the player to unlock and switch ship/bullet assets with the extra ship designs that produced.

<video src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20461089/210939650-7a335912-311f-4072-a39d-b7bf6d286da3.mp4" controls="controls" loop="loop"></video>

The video above is a rather long one at 1 minute, the reason for that is so you can listen to an entire melody I created using GarageBand. Defrain has only three songs in its soundtrack, and I produced all 3 of them with the different sounds/tracks available in GarageBand. The one in the video is my personal favorite of the three, so I just wanted to give its own video so I could listen to it on repeat while writing this blog. There really isn't much to explain on the music since I didn't have any idea what I was doing either, it just somehow worked out by the end with a bunch of trial and error.

<video src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20461089/210939646-da18a974-02aa-4a4e-b018-da72f14cf454.mp4" controls="controls" autoplay="autoplay" muted="muted" loop="loop"></video>

Going back to the gameplay, let's delve into the development of Survival Mode. This is a game mode I decided to build later on in development when I got interested in doing more behaviors for the enemies. There were things that I thought of creating for the standard enemies, but everything I thought of would probably (more than likely) ruin or disrupt the flow of gameplay of Arcade Mode. Here comes the idea of Survival Mode. This mode is similar to Arcade mode, where if you get shot once you die and have to restart the level, but in this case, there is an ending to the level. I started by keeping a basic design for the flow of the levels at first, this being the 50 enemies that have to be defeated before a trigger gets set and spawns the level's boss with all the extra features I wanted to add to the enemies. 

<video src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20461089/210939649-cf448eeb-4a02-4b1d-8830-2c54e74ca9ac.mp4" controls="controls" autoplay="autoplay" muted="muted" loop="loop"></video>

In this last video you can see the Boss for Level 1 shows up and starts shooting while also moving left and right depending on the player's position. I created the Boss by having extra limbs with their own health counters. There are different sprites for showing the cannon's health visually since there is now health value shown to the player like the Boss's overall health. I focused on the difficulty of these levels by making the play area more cramped and the bullets being different sizes depending on the cannon firing. To not spoil that much of the other bosses, they have the same functionality but play differently in strategy since I made them take in different values for adjusting speed and behavior.